**Campaign Narrative**

While I developed models to forecast the midterm elections throughout
the semester, I also kept track of the congressional race in New York’s
17th district between the Democrat Sean Patrick Maloney and Republican
Michael Lawler. Maloney is a five-time congressman representing the
neighboring 18th district and the current Chairman of the Democratic
Congressional Campaign Committee. Lawler is a first-time state assembly
member. NY-17 is divided into two parts. First, it encompasses most of
Westchester country (which is east of the Hudson River). Westchester is
diverse and has skewed more liberal in recent years as many young
professionals from New York City move into single family homes in the
suburbs (Linge). Its shift to the left is also due to its urban areas in
White Plains and Yonkers. Rockland, west of the Hudson, is somewhat more
conservative and more working class, not having the home value or
affluence of Westchester (Census Profile). Rockland decisively voted for
President Trump in 2020 while Westchester voted for Joe Biden by a wide
margin.

The demographics of NY-17 paint an interesting picture. The district is
58% white, 22% Hispanic, and 10% black while the median income and
household values are roughly 1.5x higher than the rest of the country
(Census Profile). The district also has slightly lower rates of poverty
and a higher high school and college graduation rate compared to the
rest of the country (Census Profile). The district has also been
represented by a Democrat since 2000, with none of the elections prior
to 2022 being closer than \~15-point (New York’s 17th). Every expert
rating including 538 and the Economist, predicted that Maloney would
hold this seat, with the average categorization as a “lean Democrat”
(The Economist; NateSilver538). My forecast, using a combination of
expert ratings and demographic data, predicted that Maloney would win
52% of the vote. The outcome ended up with a Lawler win by less than 1%.

Lawler ran an intelligent campaign to unseat Maloney. He fixated on
several key issues where Maloney and Democrats in New York did not have
as many answers. In many of his campaign ads and his website, he
discussed crime in New York City, a key issue in the state that people
living in the suburbs care about (Navarro). He repeatedly ran attack ads
showing a video-clip of Maloney saying he supports ending cash bail
(Navarro), a measure that critics said would make it easier for
criminals to get back on the street. Lawler also created ads that talked
about inflation and tied Maloney to the unpopular leadership of New York
City, and Joe Biden on a national level. Maloney, in my opinion, ran
what would have been a strong campaign under normal circumstances. He
focused on issues where Democrats have a clear popular advantage,
painting Lawler as a “MAGA Extremist” who works with other Republicans
in “fighting to ban abortion, not tackling crime or inflation or
improving healthcare” (Navarro).

While Maloney focused on the right issues to tie Lawler to the extremist
parts of the Republican party, I think his campaign was overshadowed by
the national coverage it got and the infighting within New York’s
Democratic Party and the National Democratic Party. Maloney previously
represented New York’s 18th district. After the state drew new maps, he
decided to run in New York’s 17th district, a move that was extremely
contentious within the party. As reported by the New York Times, the
decision was seen as selfish because with new maps, Maloney saw NY-17 as
a safer bet for his re-election, even though he unseated Mondaire Jones,
an incumbent, African American Democrat who decided to run in a
different district’s primary (Fandos). As a result, Alessandra Biaggi, a
progressive state senator, called Maloney a “selfish corporate Democrat”
and ran an unsuccessful primary challenge against him. Regardless, the
Democrats were extremely split, and this infighting dominated the entire
campaign narrative (Fandos). Many voters did not like that Maloney
appeared more concerned for his political survival than his
constituents, 70% of which he had never represented. In addition, as
head of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, his campaign
efforts were hindered by his need to focus on strategizing other races.
As the race got closer, he was criticized for the DCCC’s decision to
spend additional money on his own race (even though he recused himself
from those decisions) when other campaigns badly needed more funds
(Fandos).

Finally, I want to use Lynn Vavreck’s theory of campaigns from her 2009
book The Message Matters as a framework to evaluate the success of both
Lawler’s and Maloney’s campaigns. In her theory, she says when the
economy is strong, incumbents should focus most on the economy, running
a “clarifying campaign” connecting them with positive economic outlook
(Vavreck). When the economy is bad, incumbents should run an “insurgent
campaign” where they pick an issue where public opinion supports them
over their challenger (Vavreck). Challengers should run the opposite
campaign. When the economy is bad, challengers, like Lawler, should
focus on the economy or a “clarifying campaign” and an “insurgent
campaign” when economic conditions favor the incumbent (Vavreck). Theory
would suggest Lawler would benefit from a “clarifying campaign” because
economic conditions are bad. He did this by talking about inflation,
minimizing uncertainty about his relationship to current economic
conditions.

Theory suggests Maloney should have run an “insurgent campaign” where he
focused on an issue where he benefits from public opinion more than the
clarifying candidate. Maloney tried to do this by talking about abortion
rights and far-right extremism, issues that galvanized Democratic
turnout across the country. However, I think Maloney’s efforts were
dampened for two reasons. First, while Democrats in other states
effectively used abortion and far-right extremism against their
Republican opponents, the actual threat of abortion being overturned or
democratic institutions eroding in New York are non-existent. Democrats
hold a massive majority in both the state house and senate, and the
governor’s race ended up going to the Democratic candidate by 6-points.
Because of this, I think Maloney’s campaign messaging was not taken as
seriously because people knew these rights were not under attack in New
York. Second, voters were distracted by Maloney moving districts, seeing
it more as a way to protect himself politically (even though it ended up
backfiring).

Overall, while Maloney followed Vavreck’s theory, he failed to shake the
idea that he was running in a new district to protect his political
career and the national criticism that decision brought. Even though New
York’s 17th district has leaned democratic for two decades, the partisan
lean was not enough for Maloney to convince so many new constituents. On
the other hand, Lawler lead a strong, focused campaign where he avoided
being too-closely tied to Trump’s extremism to pull off an upset.

**Work Cited**

“Census Profile: Congressional District 17, NY.” Census Reporter,
<https://censusreporter.org/profiles/50000US3617-congressional-district-17-ny/>.

“The Economist’s 2022 House Forecast.” The Economist, The Economist
Newspaper,
<https://www.economist.com/interactive/us-midterms-2022/forecast/house/new-york>.

Fandos, Nicholas. “Biaggi Seeks to Block Sean Patrick Maloney’s Chosen
Path to Re-Election.” The New York Times, The New York Times, 23 May
2022,
<https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/23/nyregion/biaggi-sean-patrick-maloney.html>.

Linge, Mary Kay. “In Political Shift, Westchester Trends as Influential
Democrat Suburb.” New York Post, New York Post, 26 Nov. 2022,
<https://nypost.com/2022/11/26/in-a-political-shift-sixth-borough-westchester-trends-dem/>.

NateSilver538. “2022 House Forecast.” FiveThirtyEight, 8 Nov. 2022,
<https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2022-election-forecast/house/new-york/17/>.

Navarro, Aaron. “House Democrats’ Campaign Arm to Air Ads to Help a
Powerful but Vulnerable Member: Their Own Chairman.” CBS News, CBS
Interactive, 24 Oct. 2022,
<https://www.cbsnews.com/news/sean-patrick-maloney-dccc-chairman-ads-new-york-17th-congressional-district/>.

“New York’s 17th Congressional District.” Ballotpedia,
<https://ballotpedia.org/New_York%27s_17th_Congressional_District>.
Vavreck, Lynn. The Message Matters the Economy and Presidential
Campaigns. Princeton University Press, 2009.
